# Session 2: Exploration and Colonization: The British Southern Colonies

## The Southern Colonies
- Made up of Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia (sometimes Maryland)
- The first established British colonies in North America
- Founded for purely economic reasons

## The Southern Colonist
### The English Cavalier
- Economic Status: Wealthy landowning nobility
- Ethnic Background: English
- Where they Settled: Coastal lowlands in the east with the best land for large plantation farming.

### The Frontier Settler
- Economic Status: Poor former indentured servants
- Ethnic Background: Scotch-Irish and poor English
- Where they Settled: Small subsistence farms in the west near the Appalachians.

## The Jamestown Colony: 1607
- First successful English colony in North America.
- Originally founded by the Virginia Company, a British joint-stock corporation.
- The colonists were led by John Smith, a former soldier and adventurer.
- Established as an economic venture, the settlement eventually became a royal colony controlled directly by the British Crown.

### Successes
- New settlers arrived at the perfect time.
- Introduction of tobacco by John Rolfe in 1612.
- Headright System solved labor issues.
- Immigration expanded significantly.

### Problems
- Everyone looking for gold and profit.
- Disease from bad water.
- Starvation - not enough planting crops.
- Tense relations with the Powhatan Indians.
- "Starving Time" in the winter of 1609-1610.

## Early Forms of Government
- The Royal Colonies of the South (VA, NC, SC, GA) were governed by wealthy, land-owning aristocrats under the supervision of the King of England and Parliament.
- The Virginia House of Burgesses was the first elected colonial legislature in the Americas, established in 1619.
- The Virginia House of Burgesses still exists today as the Virginia Assembly, making it the oldest legislative system in the United States.

## European Treatment of Native Americans
### The Spanish
- Raised natives up into social and political life.
- Taught them cultivation of the soil, how to build houses, to live in towns, to read, to write, and other useful arts.
- Changed their wild customs into humane ones.

### The French
- Exceeded in industry, economy, and the arts of conciliating the affections of mankind.
- Emphasized peddling commerce rather than agriculture.
- Managed Indians for personal benefit.

### The English
- Intend to change Native Americans' barbarous natures.
- Teach them about the true god, the way to salvation, and obedience to the king.

## The Settlers Clash with Native Americans
- Relations with American Indians got worse over time.
- No intermarriage like the Spanish.
- Colonists wanted more land for tobacco, and Native Americans resisted.
- 1622 - Opechancanough's revolt wiped out 1/3 of VA settlers, and the company was in debt.
- 1624 - VA became a royal colony.

## Economy of the South
- Geographic Condition: Low coastal plain in the east and foothills and mountains in the west.
- Major trade port in the South - Charleston, SC.
- Cash Crops: Tobacco, Rice, and Indigo (No cotton yet!)
- Labor Force: Indentured servants and later slaves to work large plantations.
- Class Division: Wealthy plantations owners vs. poor subsistence farmers.

## The Indentured Servant
- Arrived via the "headright system" - anyone who paid their own way or another's to the New World received 50 acres of land.
- Served as indentured servants for 4-7 years before being freed and gaining ownership of their own land.
- Made up of poor English, Scot-Irish, and African individuals.

## African Slavery
- Slaves began arriving in the 17th century from Africa via the "middle passage" in the triangular trade.
- Slavery had a life term.
- Made up of African individuals.

## Impact of the Slave Trade
- Disease killing native populations made them an unstable workforce.
- African slavery became an alternative for labor due to the resistance to European diseases.
- Increased demand for slaves led to the growth of the trans-Atlantic slave trade.
- 12 million people taken from Africa by the early 1800s.

## Economic Differences Split Virginia
- Wealthy "cavalier" planters in Eastern VA.
- Former indentured servants in Western VA and the frontier.
- Led to more planters choosing African slaves over indentured servants.

## Bacon's Rebellion
- Poor whites in the west, including former indentured servants, revolted against the VA government.
- Reasons for revolt: lack of protection from Native Americans, lack of representation in the House of Burgesses.
- Revolted, marched on, and burned Jamestown.
- Led to a shift towards using African slaves instead of indentured servants due to the reduced likelihood of revolt.

## Social and Religious
- Social Structure: Dominated by family status and land ownership.
- Land Ownership: The wealthy owned plantations with slaves, the poor lived on the frontier.
- Political Structure: Controlled by the aristocracy.
- Religious Affiliation: Anglican (Church of England).