# Session 4: Exploration and Colonization

## The Middle Colonies 
- Made up of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware
- Based on their proximity to natural ports, cities such as Baltimore, New York City, and Philadelphia emerged as major centers for commerce and trade.
- The Middle colonies included many characteristics similar to settlements in New England and the South.

## The Middle Colonists
1. The Quakers (1660’s) 
   - Left England for religious reasons.
   - Settled mainly in Pennsylvania.
 
2. The Catholics (1630’s) 
   - Left England for religious purposes.
   - Settled in Maryland. 
   
3. The Dutch (1620’s) 
   - Came to the Americas for economic purposes, mainly as traders.
   - Set up a major trade port on Manhattan Island (New Amsterdam) as well as posts in present-day New Jersey and Delaware. 

## Other Groups Settling in the Middle Colonies 
- Huguenots- French Protestants 
- Jews 
- Quakers 
- German-Speaking Immigrants 

## Quaker Society 
- Religious Principles: 
  - Supported churches without ministers.
  - Promoted freedom of religion, pacifism, equality and cooperation, love for the fellow man.
- Political Methods: 
  - Led by William Penn, developed a government based on representative assembly.
  - Philadelphia became the capital for the Quaker society which Penn called his "holy experiment."
- Social Characteristics: 
  - Welcomed all into the Quaker society including Native Americans.
  - Flexible society led to the formation of a strong middle class. 

## Economy of the Middle Colonies 
- Geographic Conditions: 
  - Various land conditions and a moderate climate allowed for a mixed economy of agriculture and commerce.
- Types of farming: 
  - Small scale farming produced a variety of goods like wheat, corn, and livestock.
- Goods produced: 
  - Mix of crops as well as various craft and artisan goods.
- Labor force: 
  - Mix of professional artisans and craftsmen as well as indentured servants and some slaves in certain regions.